---
title: FieldTrip meeting - 20121121
tags: [meeting]
---

# FieldTrip meeting - 20121121

- bug1730
- bug1839: plotting of source localization data ->
- this brings up a bigger issue: output of sourcanalysis should be changed -> input for the source function should be changed too! but implementation of new source localization structure (e.g., fieldspecific dimord) requires more time ->
- how to make development which requires longer time and changes more functions? branching? do we need to change the release schedule?
- everyone could read about svn branching... etc., ->
- bug1841: assign yourself for the CC list of this bug!
