---
layout: default
---

##  FT_DATATYPE_RAW

Note that this reference documentation is identical to the help that is displayed in MATLAB when you type "help ft_datatype_raw".

`<html>``<pre>`
    `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_raw>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_RAW`</font>``</a>` describes the FieldTrip MATLAB structure for raw data
 
    The raw datatype represents sensor-level time-domain data typically
    obtained after calling `<a href=/reference/ft_definetrial>``<font color=green>`FT_DEFINETRIAL`</font>``</a>` and `<a href=/reference/ft_preprocessing>``<font color=green>`FT_PREPROCESSING`</font>``</a>`. It contains
    one or multiple segments of data, each represented as Nchan X Ntime
    arrays.
 
    An example of a raw data structure with 151 MEG channels is
 
           label: {151x1 cell}      the channel labels (e.g. 'MRC13')
            time: {1x266 cell}      the timeaxis [1*Ntime double] per trial
           trial: {1x266 cell}      the numeric data [151*Ntime double] per trial
      sampleinfo: [266x2 double]    the begin and endsample of each trial relative to the recording on disk
       trialinfo: [266x1 double]    optional trigger or condition codes for each trial
             hdr: [1x1 struct]      the full header information of the original dataset on disk
            grad: [1x1 struct]      information about the sensor array (for EEG it is called elec)
            cfg: [1x1 struct]       the configuration used by the function that generated this data structure
 
    Required field
    - time, trial, label
 
    Optional field
    - sampleinfo, trialinfo, grad, elec, opto, hdr, cfg
 
    Deprecated field
    - fsample
 
    Obsoleted field
    - offset
 
    Revision histor
 
    (2011/latest) The description of the sensors has changed, see `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_sens>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_SENS`</font>``</a>`
    for further information.
 
    (2010v2) The trialdef field has been replaced by the sampleinfo and
    trialinfo fields. The sampleinfo corresponds to trl(:,1:2), the trialinfo
    to trl(4:end).
 
    (2010v1) In 2010/Q3 it shortly contained the trialdef field which was a copy
    of the trial definition (trl) is generated by `<a href=/reference/ft_definetrial>``<font color=green>`FT_DEFINETRIAL`</font>``</a>`.
 
    (2007) It used to contain the offset field, which correcponds to trl(:,3).
    Since the offset field is redundant with the time axis, the offset field is
    from now on not present any more. It can be recreated if needed.
 
    (2003) The initial version was defined
 
    See also `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE`</font>``</a>`, `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_comp>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_COMP`</font>``</a>`, `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_timelock>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_TIMELOCK`</font>``</a>`, `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_freq>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_FREQ`</font>``</a>`,
    `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_spike>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_SPIKE`</font>``</a>`, `<a href=/reference/ft_datatype_sens>``<font color=green>`FT_DATATYPE_SENS`</font>``</a>`
`</pre>``</html>`

