---
title: FieldTrip workshop in Singapore
tags: [ohbm2018]
---

# FieldTrip workshop in Singapore

- By whom: Maria Carla Piastra, Sophie Schrader and Simon Homölle
- When: 17 June 2018
- Where: Educational courses at the [OHBM2018](<https://www.humanbrainmapping.org/files/2018/ED/EEG%20and%20MEG(1).pdf>) conference in Singapore

## What is the workshop about?

The course is aimed at researchers who want to learn how to do MEG and/or EEG source reconstruction. We expect that you know the basics of MATLAB and that you already have experience with MEG/EEG preprocessing and analysis.

In this intense one-day workshop we will explain state-of-the-art MEG and EEG source reconstruction methods. Special emphasis will be given to new features available now in FieldTrip to solve the EEG and MEG forward solution with advanced finite element methods. These techniques are the results with the collaboration with WWU Muenster University where the [SimBio](https://www.mrt.uni-jena.de/simbio/index.php/Main_Page#Welcome) and [duneuro](http://duneuro.org/) forward problem solutions have been embedded in FieldTrip pipelines.

The workshop will consist of a number of lectures, followed by hands-on sessions in which you will be tutored through the complete analysis of a MEG, EEG and MRI data set using the FieldTrip toolbox. The focus is in source reconstruction, particularly in advanced techniques available to solve the EEG and MEG forward problem. As the focus is on source reconstruction, topics that will NOT be covered in great detail are segmenting, artifact handling, averaging, frequency and time-frequency analysis, statistics. For the hands-on sessions you should bring a laptop with MATLAB installed.

More information about the program can be found below.

{% include markup/yellow %}
The SimBio software is described in detail [here](https://www.mrt.uni-jena.de/simbio/index.php/Main_Page#Welcome). The integration with FieldTrip is described in the reference below. Please cite this reference if you use the FieldTrip-SimBio pipeline in your research.

Vorwerk, J., Oostenveld, R., Piastra, M.C., Magyari, L., & Wolters, C. H. **The FieldTrip‐SimBio pipeline for EEG forward solutions.** BioMed Eng OnLine (2018) 17:37. [DOI: 10.1186/s12938-018-0463-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12938-018-0463-y).
{% include markup/end %}

## How should you prepare for the workshop?

{% include markup/yellow %}
In this workshop we will have a steep learning curve. We will move from basic preprocessing to source-level analysis. Given the limited amount of time, it is **important** that you come well prepared.
{% include markup/end %}

If you are not familiar with MATLAB or are not certain about your MATLAB skills, please go through the "MATLAB for psychologists" tutorial on <http://www.antoniahamilton.com/matlab.html>

Please read the [FieldTrip reference paper](http://www.hindawi.com/journals/cin/2011/156869/) to understand the toolbox design.

In the first workshop hands-on session we will start with preprocessing EEG data, but will not spend too much time on understanding how MATLAB works and how FieldTrip organizes the data. Therefore if you have never done any FieldTrip analysis in MATLAB before, you should read this [introduction tutorial](/tutorial/introduction).
_We will start at 9:00 sharp and will finish around 17:30._

## What is the experiment about?

The experiment that the subject performed is a slight adaptation of the classical oddball experiment. The details about the experiment can be found [here](/workshop/natmeg2014/meg_audodd).

## Schedule for Sunday

| 08:00-08:30 | Welcome and getting started                                    |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 08:30-9:20  | Lecture - Preprocessing                                        |
| 9:20-10:40  | Hands on - [Preprocessing](/workshop/ohbm2018/preprocessing)   |
| 10:40-11:00 | Break                                                          |
| 11:00-12:00 | Lecture - Forward problem                                      |
| 12:00-13:00 | Lunch break                                                    |
| 13:00-14:00 | Hands on - [Forward problem](/workshop/ohbm2018/forward)       |
| 14:00-14:45 | Lecture - Inverse problem                                      |
| 14:45-15:00 | Break                                                          |
| 15:00-16:00 | Hands on -[Inverse problem](/workshop/ohbm2018/inverse)        |
| 16:00-16:30 | Wrap-up-the-day: special topics, general questions and answers |

{% include markup/yellow %}
Currently, the pipeline for computing the MEG forward problem solution has been tested on Ubuntu systems, where MATLAB should be started with the following command:

```bash
BLAS_VERSION=/usr/lib/libblas.so
LD_PRELOAD=/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libstdc++.so.6
./matlab
```

{% include markup/end %}

Once Matlab is open, you need to issue the following command

    clc;
    clear;
    close all;

    restoredefaultpath    % restore default folder for matlab
    path2ft_ohbm2018 = ''; % write your path
    cd(path2ft_ohbm2018)

    maindir = pwd;        % keep main path

    cd FieldTrip % set up the path of fieldtrip
    addpath([path2ft_ohbm2018,'/external_duneuro'])
    addpath(pwd)
    ft_defaults

    cd(maindir)           % return to main

{% include markup/red %}
Please do NOT use the graphical path management tool from MATLAB. In this hands-on session we'll manage the path from the command line, but in general you are much better off using the startup.m file than the path GUI.

Please do NOT add FieldTrip with all subdirectories, subdirectories will be added automatically when needed, and only when needed.
{% include markup/end %}

The `restoredefaultpath` command clears your path, keeping only the official MATLAB toolboxes. The `addpath(pwd)` statement adds the present working directory, i.e. the directory containing the FieldTrip main functions. The `ft_defaults` command ensures that all required subdirectories are added to the path.

If you get the error "can't find the command ft_defaults" you should check the present working directory.

After installing FieldTrip to your path, you need to change into the hands-on specific directory, containing the data that is necessary to run the specific hands-on session. These folders are located in C:\\FieldTrip_workshop\\OHBM2018\\data.
