---
title: FieldTrip workshop in Oslo
tags: [oslo2019, eeg-language]
---

# FieldTrip workshop in Oslo

## Where

RITMO Centre for Interdisciplinary Studies in Rhythm, Time and Motion  
Forskningsveien 3A  
0373 Oslo  
Norway

## When

Wednesday June 12th - Friday June 14th 2019

## Who

The RITMO Centre is the local organizer. Sabine Leske and Alejandro Omar Blenkmann are in charge of the local organization.
Lau Møller Andersen (Karolinska Institute, Stockholm) and Britta Westner (CFIN, Aarhus University) are the lecturers.

There will be room for ~30 participants. RITMO centre employees and students have priority.  
When the local organizers have assessed how many RITMO affiliates are attending, registration will open to everyone.

## Tentative Programme

### Wednesday, June 12th

- 07.30-08.00 Registration, handouts and coffee
- 08.00-09.00 Introduction to MATLAB and the FieldTrip toolbox (Lecture)
- 09.00-09.15 Coffee break
- 09.15-10.45 Getting started with EEG data, quality checks, cleaning of data and Event-Related Potentials (Hands-on)
- 10.45-11.00 Coffee break
- 11.00-12.00 Frequency and Time-Frequency analysis (Lecture)
- 12.00-13.15 Lunch
- 13.15.13.45 Questions and Answers so far
- 13.45-15.15 Time-Frequency analysis of EEG data (Hands-on)
- 15.15-15.30 Coffee break
- 15.30-16.00 Wrap-up of the day and questions
- 16.00-17.30 Playground ??

### Thursday, June 13th

- 08.00-09.15 Source reconstruction using beamformers (Lecture)
- 09.15-09.30 Coffee Break
- 09.30-11.00 Localizing oscillatory sources (Hands-on)
- 11.15-12.15 Cluster-based statistical testing (Lecture)
- 12.15-13.15 Lunch
- 13.15-15.15 Cluster-based statistical testing (Hands-on)
- 15.15-15.30 Coffee break
- 15.30-16.00 Wrap-up of the day and questions
- 16.00-17.30 Playground ??

### Friday, June 14th

- 08.00-09.15 Group Analysis and statistical testing re-visited (Lecture)
- 09.00-09.15 Coffee break
- 09.15-11.00 Group analysis and statistical testing re-visited (Hands-on)
- 11.00-11.15 Coffee break
- 11.15-12.15 Wrap-up of Group Analysis
- 12.15-13.15 Lunch
- 13.15-14.15 Machine learning applied to EEG data (Lecture)
- 14.15-14.30 Coffee break
- 14.30-16.00 Playground
- 16.00-17.30 Playground ??
- 18.00-23.59 Party


## The data used for the hands-on sessions

During the hands-on sessions we will use EEG data recorded in a [language experiment](/workshop/madrid2019/eeg_language).

The data will be provided on a USB stick during the hands-on sessions. You can also download the data from our [FTP server](ftp://ftp.fieldtriptoolbox.org/pub/fieldtrip/workshop/oslo2019/).

## Installing FieldTrip and setting up MATLAB

For the hands-on sessions you have to start MATLAB. To ensure that everything
runs smooth, we will work with a clean and well-tested version of FieldTrip that
is distributed on a USB stick, rather than the version you might already have
installed. Furthermore, the tutorial data does not have to be downloaded but
will also be distributed on the USB stick.

1.  Copy the contents from the USB stick to your computer
2.  Unzip the fieldtrip-xxxxxxxx.zip file.
3.  Unzip the "data.zip" file, you should place the contents in the same directory, e.g. in a newly created directory called 'toolkit'.

{% include markup/danger %}
Depending on the unzip program you are using (e.g. Winrar), the name of the zip file might also appear as directiory, resulting in path_to_directory/fieldtrip-xxxxxxxx/fieldtrip-xxxxxxxx, i.e. the FieldTrip directory in a FieldTrip directory. Please fix that by moving all files one level up.
{% include markup/end %}

After copying all files to your computer and unzipping then, you start MATLAB. To ensure that the right version of FieldTrip is used, and not another version (such as the one included in SPM or EEGLAB), you type in the MATLAB command window

    restoredefaultpath
    cd path_to_directory/fieldtrip-xxxxxxxx
    addpath(pwd)
    ft_defaults

{% include markup/danger %}
Please do NOT use the graphical path management tool from MATLAB. In this hands-on session we'll manage the path from the command line, but in general you are much better off using a startup.m file than the path GUI.

Please do NOT add FieldTrip with all subdirectories, subdirectories will be added automatically when needed, but only when needed.
{% include markup/end %}

The `restoredefaultpath` command clears your path, keeping only the
official MATLAB toolboxes. The `addpath(pwd)` statement adds the
present working directory, i.e. the directory containing the fieldtrip
main funcctions. The `ft_defaults` command ensures that all required
subdirectories are added to the path.

If you get the error "can't find the command ft_defaults" you should check the present working directory.
